[Music]
I got my first car accident when I was
16 I just got my license and I was
driving home when a car pulled into the
intersection and bang it hit me it
happened that quick bang but when I play
that memory back it doesn't take two
seconds
I see the tires of the car rolling
through the stop sign I have time to
think you know I think that car is going
to hit me I see the right-hand corner of
the hood crumpled up like tin foil see
the red paint flake off and drift into
the air I can see all of that like it's
happening in slow motion in my memory
that experience takes 10 seconds but why
why did that memory play back longer
than the actual time it took this is an
interesting phenomenon and it's not just
for car accidents a roller coaster our
first kiss these events seem to take
longer than they actually take but why
and when it comes to writing about that
experience how do I get that peculiar
feeling across how do I slow down time
as a writer to get the answer we have to
visit Hollywood you see the way
filmmakers create slow motion will tell
us a lot about how writers can create
slow motion first let's remember how
film works when the camera turns on it's
not recording motion it's taking lots
and lots of individual pictures then
when those pictures are played back in a
projector they blend together and create
the appearance of motion like a flipbook
so let's imagine that a cameraman needs
to film his actress skipping through a
field of daisies in regular motion ready
action she skips across the field he
records it and cut let's say for the
sake of easy math that our cameraman
took 50 pictures 50 little frames on
that length of film now let's take that
film and play it back at the rate of 50
frames per 5 seconds this rate is
constant the projector will always go at
the same speed this is easy we've got 50
frames so our film takes five seconds
she skips across the field
and cut so then how do we slow down time
in film how do we create slow motion
maybe this is a surprise but we don't
take less pictures we take more pictures
ready action
she skips across the field he records it
and cut now we have a lot of film a long
length let's say 100 frames long now
when we play it back it takes a longer
time to get through and there's the
actress in slow motion the field babe
which brings us now to writing when
you're writing a narrative you may want
to use slow motion in one of your scenes
it's a cool effect just like it is in
Hollywood and it draws the reader's
attention to important moments well
here's how you do it you see when we
read our brain makes the words into
pictures and the pictures blend into
action so what we read is what we see in
the time it takes us to read it for
example imagine you're writing a
narrative about your game-winning free
throw in the championship game here's a
moment as a writer that you might want
to slow down time to really capture the
second-by-second tension produced by the
scene when you concentrate you put the
pencil to paper you really want to slow
down time you write I shot the ball in
the hoop time slowed down then we won to
read that takes two seconds therefore
your reader imagines a scene that takes
two second ball goes up comes down done
see even though you wrote time slowed
down you didn't achieve that effect for
your reader just saying it doesn't make
it happen now let's take what we know
about film time slows down with more
pictures and try again this time write a
lot more I bent my knees and held the
ball loosely letting the ball bounce on
the floor once more I gathered my
thoughts this was the moment my right
arm extended as I released the ball with
the gentle flick it rotated slightly as
it arched toward the rim I held my
breath the ball nudged the
rym falling through the net with a
gentle satisfying swish and the crowd
exploded from there see see we just slow
down time through our writing the bottom
line is this there are moments in life
that take longer than they actually take
when you're planning out your narrative
think about those moments those snippets
of life that took longer than the watch
the moment of hearing bad news the
moment of hearing good news the moment
of exhilaration when you realize you hit
the jump or the moment when you realize
you aren't gonna land it once you
identify these moments in your narrative
you can use this effect of slow motion
when you write just remember it's not
enough to say time slowed down and it's
not enough to throw a couple adjectives
in a sentence and call it done either
descriptive writing is good writing
that's true but if you want to express
the feeling of slow motion in life you
have to actually take up more physical
space on the page use more films so to
speak in doing so you will create
tension and keep your reader interested
and that way the next time you write
you'll control the camera of your own
life
you